“Beauty and the Beast”, a romantic pop ballad written by Howard Ashman, composed by Alan Menken, and performed by Angela Lansbury, is the theme song of the animated movie of the same title. The song describes the relationship between the movie’s two main characters, Belle and the Beast, focusing on their beginning to develop romantic feelings for each other. Initially, both cannot stand each other but later they find that while the strength of their feelings for each other has remained the same, their feelings have shifted from distaste to love. Having only words and a running time of around two minutes, “Beauty and the Beast” is short compared to many of the romantic pop ballads of its time. Despite this, the song is able to impart on the audience a full battery of warm emotions. It is able to accomplish this emotional depth by effectively using the audiences’ nostalgia: nostalgia for old-fashioned, fantasied romance found in popular media.

Even before the lyrics are sung, the song presents the audience with a nostalgic atmosphere. The song begins with a slow legato instrumental, introducing a mood of antiquity and romance. This mood is developed by the singer’s identity. She is an antique porcelain teapot, a wise experienced maternal figure, and this adds to the nostalgic mood of the song. This historic aura is also largely achieved by the use of the metaphor “Tale as old as time”, which is repeated three times over the course of the song. It is not made explicit what “tale” the persona of the song is referring to, but it is implied that the tale is that of the romance between Belle and the Beast. The alliteration of t only further strengthens the link between the tale and time. The use of harmonic words like “tune”, “song”, and “rhyme” in describing the age of the tale (“Tune as old as song” and “Song as old as rhyme”), along with the rocking motion provided by the rhyme scheme (which we will examine in more detail later), and the slow melody of the song itself help make the nostalgia pleasant and harmonious. The song’s writers use a mélange of techniques to achieve the specific mood of the song. The number and variety of techniques used to set the mood is a testament to its importance to the songwriters. This setting of the mood is integral to the audience’s interpretation of romance clichés within the song.

The song’s writers use romance clichés to activate the audience’s nostalgia for fantasized romance. These romance clichés link the song to popular media that use the same conventions. Their romance being “as old as time” seems to suggest that the love between them was destined from the very beginning: it was inevitable. The opening verse also portrays Belle and the Beast’s romance as one that is similar to a “hate-at-first-sight” romance. In the song’s opening verse, Belle and the Beast fall “head over heals” in love: it happened unexpectedly and suddenly. The first few lines say that at first, Belle and the Beast are “Barely even friends/ Then somebody bends/ Unexpectedly”. Initially Belle and the Beast are not even in good terms with each other: love is not at all a possibility. After “somebody bends,” however, both fall quickly in love, ignoring their previous distaste for one another. It is worth noting, though, that perhaps even the person who “[bent]” also did not expect his (or her) action. The fact that “somebody” is neutral with regards to gender means that it is unimportant who exactly initiated the relationship; instead we are forced to focus on the resulting romance. The enjambment from “bends” to “Unexpectedly”, which in the song can be detected due to both a pause and the song’s rhyme scheme, makes the audience jump down to the next line, mimicking Belle and the Beast’s falling into love: letting the audience share a piece of the romance. The manner the verses are sung also helps create a feeling that the love was unexpected. The first line of every verse is sung slowly but the subsequent lines rapidly increase in speed, mirroring the relationship happening slowly at first but then all at once. By using the romance conventions above, the song is able to convey emotionally dense information in barely one verse.

In highlighting the contrast between the two lovers the song also plays on the romantic convention of two complete opposites finding love – “opposites attract” – and them later finding out that they are “not-so-different-after-all”. Referring to Belle as “Beauty” compounds upon the juxtaposition of Belle and the Beast. Calling her “Beauty” has the effect of saying that Belle is Beauty incarnate; she is no longer just a human, instead, she is an abstract noun: an idea of perfection. This lines preceding this praise of Belle repeated “little”, “small”, and “least” and the jump from such miniscule adjectives to a grand adjective like “Beauty” makes the praise more powerful. While Belle is held up on a pedestal, the Beast remains the same. He is something less than human. With his name come connotations of savagery, ugliness, and imperfection. Ironically, the second verse, while highlighting the contrast between Belle and the Beast, also serves to show how both are not so different after all. The line “Neither one prepared” shows how both were equally taken by surprised by the budding romance. The shared innocence of both Belle and the Beast is shown when it is revealed that “both [were] a little scared” for what is likely the first romance for both parties.

The last three verses serve as Belle and the Beast’s “happily ever after”: they show that their love is everlasting. The anaphora of “Ever” in the third verse emphasizes the lasting nature of their love. “Ever” is also repeated exactly four times, and it is not too much of a reach to suggest that the writer intended this to mean the love would last forever (four-ever). By suggesting that the feelings they have are “Ever just the same” and “Ever as before”, the song suggests that the love they have is unchanging and constant. This idea of everlasting love is emphasized by the song’s rhyme scheme. The song’s strict ABCCB rhyme scheme, where the rhyming second and fifth line sandwich the rhyming third and fourth line, exudes a cyclical feeling both within a verse and throughout the whole song. We expect the next verse to rhyme in the same way as the previous verse in the same way we expect the relationship to continue to bloom. Imagery of a rising sun is also used to highlight Belle and the Beast’s everlasting love for each other. The constant unwavering sunrise is often used as a symbol of hope, this symbolism likely links to a hopeful romance between Belle and the Beast. Both times the sun is used as a metaphor the word “rise” or “rising” occurs as the notes of the music themselves rise: giving the impression that the relationship itself is on an upwards rise. The first time imagery of a rising sun is used, it is in future tense: “the sun will rise”, but the second time it is used, it is in present tense: “the sun/ rising in the east”. This seems to suggest that even with the passing of time, the strength of the relationship and the power of their love for each other will remain constant.
While the song is clearly about the growing relationship of the movie’s main protagonists, it captures wonderfully the act of falling head first in love. The song is able to capture so much and evoke so much emotion. It owes this ability to its use of romance conventions to impart nostalgia. By using these conventions, the song links itself to the wealth of other media that have used them and share in the emotions and feelings that those other media have imparted on the audience. The reason why these generic romance clichés are so effective is their inherent universality and relatability. They are simple formulas by design and so act as a catchall for many emotional plots, be they from popular media or our own lives. However, because these conventions are so cliché, it is likely that they would not have had as deep an emotional impact had the mood of the song not been set so clearly at its beginning.
